welcome to the fifth section of hands-on
continuous integration and automation
with Jenkins in this section we are
going to explore blue ocean which is the
new user interface of Jenkins 2 we will
see what is blue ocean how to install it
and how to use it in the practical part
we will create a pipeline job using the
visual editor provided with blue ocean
let's start with an introduction to what
is blue ocean in this video we will
learn what is blue ocean and which
advantages it brings we will also have a
preview of what blue ocean looks like
there is no practical part in this video
but we will introduce the user interface
that we are going to use in the next
videos of this section let's start by
defining what is blue ocean blue ocean
is the new user interface coming with
Jenkins 2 it is designed for creating
and running pipeline jobs however it
still works well with normal freestyle
jobs it is much more visual than the
classic UI and has a visual editor for
creating pipelines without writing code
it also has nice visualizations
particularly suited for CI and CD
pipelines let's see which advantages
blue ocean brings first it is a much
more intuitive and visual tool for
creating managing and running pipeline
jobs in Jenkins it is easy to use for
anyone in your team no need to be a CI
or see the expert to create pipelines
the visual editor makes it trivial to
setup pipeline jobs without writing
source code the user interface also
makes it easier to debug an issue in a
pipeline job as it pinpoints where an
error occurs inside the pipeline a major
feature is the native integration with
tools like github and bitbucket in
particular the ability to integrate
easily branches and pull requests in a
CI CD workflow in
she'll blue ocean is a more modern UI
with a better user experience however
you can easily switch between blue ocean
and the classic UI while you are getting
used to blue ocean or managing non
pipeline jobs just to whet your appetite
I want to give you a preview of how blue
ocean looks like this is the blue ocean
dashboard
the default view showing in this case an
overview of all the pipeline projects in
Jenkins you can notice the blue colored
navigation bar where you can search for
existing pipelines useful when you have
lots of pipeline jobs and create a new
pipeline the pipeline favorite list
shows a list of pipeline projects that
the user defined as favorite this list
provides key information such as name
run status branch commit hash time of
last execution etc about pipelines you
need to access often or keep an eye on
the pipeline list shows the state of
each project in Jenkins in particular it
shows the name the health icon the
number of branches and pull requests
passing or failing and the star
indicating if the job has been added to
the favorite list the activity view
shows all the activities related to a
part line in particular the navigation
bar shows the pipeline names if it has
been added to the favorite list and tabs
for showing activity branches and pull
requests for a given pipeline the
default tab of the activity view is the
activity tab which shows the latest
completed or running execution of a
pipeline and useful information such as
billed status number of runs commit hash
branch or pull request that initiated
the build duration of the build and when
the build was last completed you also
have a button to rerun a specific build
or stop it while it's running
one of the advantages of the blue ocean
user interface is to pinpoint an issue
within a pipeline and this makes easier
to debug an error here is an example of
how a failed pipeline execution is shown
via blue ocean if a step fails during
the execution it is highlighted in the
pipeline visualization and the console
log of the failed step is displayed the
pipeline visual editor is another major
feature in blue ocean and is the
simplest way to create a pipeline job in
Jenkins the visual editor allows to
create a declarative pipeline by a
series of predefined steps and
automatically generates the source code
for you it is a great way to get started
with pipelines in Jenkins especially if
you're not familiar with groovy or the
declarative syntax this is the end of
this video where we introduce blue ocean
watch the next video where we'll be
installing blue ocean in Jenkins